# Week 1

## What is Information Visualization

The first thing that we need to define when we talk about geographic visualization or visualization of geographical data, is to define what geographical data is. So, broadly speaking, I would define geographical data, any dataset that contains some geographical information. So, let's try to define a little bit more precisely what this type of information can be. One way I like to describe it is that there are two broad classes of geographic information. So, the first one is what I call spatial objects. So, for instance, counties, regions, or buildings, or lakes, and so on. The second one is non-spatial objects that are geo-located. So, say you are studying a particular phenomenon, but this phenomenon or these objects have a geographical location. So, let me give you a few more details about these two categories. So, spatial objects. So, spatial objects are objects that have a geographical or a spatial shape and some spatial extent, and these matters for your visualization.

The map is the main object of interest in this kind of data. For instance, if I'm visualizing some information over the, showing the information on the states of the United States, and it's important for me to show you the shape of these states and where they are, well then, I can use a map like that. So, every single state here is a geographical object. Why is it a geographical spatial object? Because it has a specific location but also a spatial extent in a very specific borders and shape. Okay? So, that's the reason why I call this a spatial object. Another example of spatial object is given in this map. So, this is a very interesting map by the way. So, these are various locations in the United States that are called Rome, and these are all the locations that can be reached starting from any city that is called Rome in the United States. So, here what you see are basically a series of streets connected one to another or highways. So, these are geographical objects, spatial objects, and they have a spatial extent and a shape and so on. So, the phenomenon here is about this particular spatial objects. Here is another example. This is a map that shows where some types of buildings are located and also what kind of area they occupy. Once again, this is an example of a spatial object. Now, we also have non-spatial objects that can be geographically located. So, for these kind of cases, shape doesn't really matter and the extent of these objects doesn't really matter. The role of the map is to only be a reference to see where these objects or phenomena are located. Let me give you an example. Here we have a map of Manhattan, and I am visualizing here the number of bikes for the city bike program that are picked up at a certain time of the day in all the existing stations that are in Manhattan. Okay. Now, so, this is not necessarily a spatial object. But this object is actually spatially located, every single station is spatially located. But as you can see, there's no shape, there's no spatial extent, there is only one single location. So, this is the main difference between these two broad classes of data. One is spatial objects and the other ones are non-spatial objects that may be or are actually geographically located. Now, let's talk more precisely about three types of geographical or spatial data. So, the first one is regions. So, anything that represents a region, and then has a shape and a spatial extent is a region type. Okay? The second one is location. So, they are typically when we are talking about geographical data, we have latitude and longitude that define a specific location. In general, for spatial representations, we can have spatial coordinates that define a specific location. Finally, we have what I call identifiers. So, what is an identifier? An identifier is basically the name or a label for an object that is spatial or geographically located. But the attribute itself doesn't define the location or the shape and spatial extent of this object. So, in summary, for these three types of geographical data, the first two are inherently geographical or spatial. The last one is not spatial,

but it can be translated to some specific location or to some specific region. In conclusion, there is a very important concept here, the idea of geocoding and reverse geocoding that is related to the types that have just introduced. What does it mean? Well, it means that, so geocoding is the process of translating an identifier into a specific location. So, say for instance, let's use the same examples that I've just shown to you. I have all the stations, all the bike stations in New York City, and each bike station is represented by a specific ID. So, that will be an identifier for the bike stations. But if I want to geocode these identifiers, so I need to find the latitude and longitude for each of these bike stations. This process is called geocoding. The reverse is also possible and often needed. So, there are situations where you do have the location of something or the spatial extent of something, and you want to go back to the name of the region or the name of some identifier that identifies that specific location. So, our specific example here would be for instance, the name of a state. You may want to translate it into our specific spatial coordinate, or you may want to do the reverse. You have some spatial coordinates, but you want to know which state they correspond to.